You Can Get Involved in Legislation
Find out about the proposed law. After a bill is introduced and in print,
It may not be considered by any conmittee for 30 days. This delay allows
time to study the issue and organize support or opposition.
Investigate the issue. Write to the author, asking for a copy of the bill
any other information about it that is available. Every citizen of
California is also entitled to reguest one free copy of any bill (up to 100
copies per year) from the Legislative Bill Room, State Capitol, Sacramento,
California
Write or phone your own legislator serving in the house where the bill
originated. The staff in the district may have additional information and
can relay your concerns to the Capitol office.
Make direct contact with the bill's author. Offer your support or proposed
changes to improve the bill. During the thirty day waiting period the
author hears from both supporters and opponents of the measure, and will
attempt to resolve the conflicts. The better condition a bill is in before
its first hearing, the greater its chances for success.
Determine the "route" the bill will take; the carmittees before which it
will be heard. If your legislator is a member of a cormittee where this
bill will be heard, be sure he or she knows your concerns, in addition to
writing of your views to the cormittee chairperson.
Promote the bill's Passage. After a bill is heard in Carmittee (s) it
returns to the floor for final action. Letters, telephone calls, telegrams
and personal visits will help secure passage. 
Constituents are the most important people in the legislator's life.
Your representative's very existence rests upon his or her ability to
present the views of the district. This cannot be done unless you, as a
constituent, let your opinions b e heard.
1. For effective cormunication KNOW THE ISSUES. Whether you are
supporting or opposing a piece of legislation, clear, reasonable
explanation of your opinion will get priority treatment from your
representative.
2. KNOW YOUR REPRESENTATIVES AND THE COMMITTEES THEY SERVE ON. The more
you know about those you elect to represent you, the easier it is to
communicate effectively. Many members publish newsletters to keep
their constituents aware of their activities. Items in these
newsletters frequently provide an excellent source of ideas for
comment.
3 . KNOW THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS. A piece of legislation can g o through
several steps before it becames fully operative. The time to contact
your Legislator is before the legislative proposal comes before his or
her conmittee or the appropriate House. It also helps to know the
budget process to better understand State spending priorities.
4. VOICE YOUR VIEWS. Let your Assembly member and Senator know your
opinions.
recanmend what you would like done.
Other methods of communication should not be overlooked. The
personal visit is also effective in addition to the phone call,
telegram or postcard. Use your district offices.
Work with the Legislator's staff. D o not assume your message will
not reach your representative. His or her staff is there to aid you in
letting your thoughts be conveyed.
5. ATTEND PUBLIC MEETINGS to gain further information about legislation
and invite tows representative to 70in you.
701 OCEAN STREET 1200 AGUAJITO ROAD
240 
Tips o n Uriting Your Eggislator
INTRODUCE YOURSELF: Tell who you are, but don't make a biography out of it. A simple
statement, such as "I am the president of CSEA Chapter 304" will do nicely; or "I a m a n analyst
in the Department of Water Resources. " Make sure to include your address at the top of the
letter and your full name at the bottan.
USE APPROPRIATE SIATIONERY: If you are writing on behalf of your organization or in an
official capacity of some sort, be sure to use the printed letterhead. This gives the letter a
certain dignity and stature.
B E SPECIFIC: Identify the bill you are writing about. If you don't know the bill number,
identify it by a brief description or its popular name, such as "the collective bargaining bill
introduced by Senator Schmaltz." Sometimes bills are complex, containing many sections or
amendments. In these cases, try to identify the particular portion you are concerned with.
BE TIMELY: Make certain you write in time to do some good. If the bill is already out of
conmittee by the time you write, or if it has already been passed (or has died) on the floor,
your belated efforts have done no good.
WRITE TO YOUR OWN LEGISLATOR: It usually does little good to write to a legislator who is not
in your district. An exception to this -- and an important one -- is when a bill is in
cormittee, and you want to write the chairman or the members of that carmittee.
BE BRIEF: Your legislator is a busy person, and so are the members of his staff. Get to the
point quickly without too much preliminary. In general, a handwritten letter should run no
more than two pages, a typed letter no more than one. (Rule of thumb: The effectiveness of a
letter is usually in inverse proportion to its length.)
MAKE IT PERSONAL: It's always best to express your own thoughts. A signature on a form letter
does not make a good impression. It's easy to identify form letters - they come in bunches -
and a form letter usually gets a form reply, or none at all.
GIVE YOUR REASONS: Whether you are for or against, state your case clearly.
like "I a m bitterly opposed...
" do not help.
Try something like this: "SB 12 would put state
employees like m e on welfare. " Give as many reasons as you can why the passage of a particular
bill would help or hurt you, but don't overstate your case. If you have special information on
the subject, give it.
BE CONSTRUCTIVE: Don't limit your points to what is wrong with a bill. Suggest changes that
would improve it. Your legislator might welcome a chance to offer an amendment that would make
the bill more acceptable to everyone.
NEVER THREATEN: If you threaten your legislator with dire consequences (I'll never vote for
you again!), he will probably just ignore it. It might have an adverse effect, too.
you call him names and cast aspersions on his lineage, you can't expect his favorable response.
In short, don't write when you are angry. And don't pretend to have vast influence over a
large segment of his constituents. This will only tend to weaken your own credibility and,
hence, your case.
Remember there are two sides to every issue. The bill you refer to may have
a hundred pages and twenty provisions other than the one that concerns you.
may be forced to vote for a measure you oppose, even though he agrees with you on a certain
portion of it.
ASK FOR A RESPONSE: Include a question in your letter that will require some response.
example, ask for his views on the legislation in question or how he thinks it will affect you,
your job, your department or your district.
SHOW YOU CARE: After the votes are in and the smoke has cleared away, there is still something
for you to do. If your legislator has voted your way on a bill, send him a short note of
appreciation. You may not think this is important, but it is.
Reprinted Iran Employees Political Information Conmittee Newsletter.
FUNDAMENTAL DO'S AND DON'TS
DO address your representative properly.
DO write legibly.
DO be brief and to the point.
Do use your own words and your own stationery.
DO b e sure to include your address and sign your name legibly.
DO b e courteous and reasonable.
DO feel free to write if you have a question or problem dealing
with procedures of governmental departments or agencies.
DO write to say you approve, not just to complain or oppose.
DO include pertinent attachments, such as editorials from local newspapers.
DO write early in the session before a bill has been voted on.
DO write the chairman or members of a committee holding hearings o n
legislation in which you are interested, if you have facts which
you think should influence their thinking.
DON'T begin on the righteous note of "As a citizen and taxpayer..."
DON'T apologize for taking his or her time.
DON'T say "I hope this gets by your secretary."
DON'T be rude or threatening.
DON'T b e vague.
DON'T write to a member from another district j


